[SYCL] Updated Level-Zero backend spec according to SYCL 2020 standard (#4560)
intel/llvm: sycl/doc/extensions/LevelZeroBackend/LevelZeroBackend.md

The Level-Zero backend is aimed to provide the best possible performance of SYCL application on a variety of targets supported.
The currently supported targets are all Intel GPUs starting with Gen9.

This extension provides a feature-test macro as described in the core SYCL specification section 6.3.3 "Feature test macros".
Therefore, an implementation supporting this extension must predefine the macro `SYCL_EXT_ONEAPI_BACKEND_LEVEL_ZERO`.

> Applications can test for the existence of this macro to determine if the implementation supports this feature.

Reviewer: Since this macro is a feature-test macro, its value should tell which revision of the extension the implementation supports.  This allows applications to test the value to see if an API is available.  We should use the same numbering scheme as other extensions, so this first revision will be revision `1`, the next will be `2`, etc.  I suggest using a table to document the revision numbers as we do in [device-if](https://github.com/intel/llvm/blob/sycl/sycl/doc/extensions/DeviceIf/device_if.asciidoc) and other extensions.  For this first revision, the table will have just one row.

This is especially important now that we consider this extension "stable" (not "experimental").

Author: OK

The Level-Zero backend is aimed to provide the best possible performance of SYCL application on a variety of targets supported.
The currently supported targets are all Intel GPUs starting with Gen9.

> This extension provides a feature-test macro as described in the core SYCL specification section 6.3.3 "Feature test macros". Therefore, an implementation supporting this extension must predefine the macro SYCL_EXT_ONEAPI_DEVICE_IF to one of the values defined in the table below. Applications can test for the existence of this macro to determine if the implementation supports this feature, or applications can test the macro’s value to determine which of the extension’s APIs the implementation supports.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This extension provides a feature-test macro as described in the core SYCL specification section 6.3.3 "Feature test macros". Therefore, an implementation supporting this extension must predefine the macro SYCL_EXT_ONEAPI_BACKEND_LEVEL_ZERO to one of the values defined in the table below. Applications can test for the existence of this macro to determine if the implementation supports this feature, or applications can test the macro’s value to determine which of the extension’s APIs the implementation supports.

```
copy-paste issue?

<td>kernel_bundle</td>
<td>

``` C++
std::vector<ze_module_handle_t>
```
</td>
<td><pre>ze_module_handle_t</pre></td>
</tr>
</table>

### 4.2 Obtaining of native Level-Zero handles from SYCL objects
                
The ```sycl::get_native<backend::ext_oneapi_level_zero>``` free-function is how a raw native Level-Zero handle can be obtained
for a specific SYCL object.
``` C++
template <backend BackendName, class SyclObjectT>
auto get_native(const SyclObjectT &Obj)
    -> backend_return_t<BackendName, SyclObjectT>
```
It is currently supported for SYCL ```platform```, ```device```, ```context```, ```queue```, ```event```
and ```kernel_bundle``` classes.

### 4.3 Construct a SYCL object from a Level-Zero handle
        
The following free functions defined in the ```sycl``` namespace are specialized for Level-Zero backend to allow
an application to create a SYCL object that encapsulates a corresponding Level-Zero object:

<table>
<tr>
<th>Level-Zero interoperability function</th>
<th style="text-align:left"> Description</th>
</tr><tr>
<td>

``` C++
make_platform<backend::ext_oneapi_level_zero>(
    const backend_input_t<
        backend::ext_oneapi_level_zero, platform> &)
```
</td>

> <td>Constructs a SYCL platform instance from a Level-Zero <code>ze_driver_handle_t</code></td>

Reviewer: I think we should also add the following, which aligns this API with the core SYCL APIs that return `platform` objects.

> The SYCL execution environment contains a fixed number of platforms that are enumerated via `sycl::platform::get_platforms()`.  Calling this function does not create a new platform.  Rather it merely creates a `sycl::platform` object that is a copy of one of the platforms from that enumeration.

Author: OK

</tr><tr>
<td>

``` C++
make_device<backend::ext_oneapi_level_zero>(
    const backend_input_t<
        backend::ext_oneapi_level_zero, device> &)
```
</td>

> <td>Constructs a SYCL device instance from a Level-Zero <code>ze_device_handle_t</code>.</td>

Reviewer: And we should add something similar here:

> The SYCL execution environment contains a fixed number of devices that are enumerated via `sycl::device::get_devices()`.  When the native handle represents a top-level device (i.e. not a sub-device), this function merely creates a `sycl::device` object that is a copy of one of the devices from that enumeration.

</tr><tr>
<td>

``` C++
make_context<backend::ext_oneapi_level_zero>(
    const backend_input_t<
        backend::ext_oneapi_level_zero, context> &)
```
</td>

> <td>Constructs a SYCL context instance from a Level-Zero <code>ze_context_handle_t</code>. The context is created against the devices passed in <code>DeviceList</code> structure member. There must be at least one device given and all the devices must be from the same SYCL platform and thus from the same Level-Zero driver. The <code>Ownership</code> input structure member specifies if the SYCL runtime should take ownership of the passed native handle. The default behavior is to transfer the ownership to the SYCL runtime. See section 4.4 for details.</td>

Reviewer: > The default behavior is to transfer the ownership to the SYCL runtime.

How can there be a default behavior?  The API doesn't have a default value for the `Ownership` field because it is not possible to have a default value for one field in a structure like this.  Same comment for all the other API descriptions below.

Author: OK, except that it is also true for sub-devices

</tr><tr>
<td>

``` C++
make_event<backend::ext_oneapi_level_zero>(
    const backend_input_t<
        backend::ext_oneapi_level_zero, event> &,
    const context &Context)
```
</td>
<td>Constructs a SYCL event instance from a Level-Zero <code>ze_event_handle_t</code>. The <code>Context</code> argument must be a valid SYCL context encapsulating a Level-Zero context. The Level-Zero event should be allocated from an event pool created in the same context. The <code>Ownership</code> input structure member specifies if the SYCL runtime should take ownership of the passed native handle. The default behavior is to transfer the ownership to the SYCL runtime. See section 4.4 for details.</td>
</tr><tr>
<td>

``` C++
make_kernel_bundle<backend::ext_oneapi_level_zero,
                   bundle_state::executable>(
    const backend_input_t<
        backend::ext_oneapi_level_zero,
        kernel_bundle<bundle_state::executable>> &,
    const context &Context)
```
</td>

> <td>Constructs a SYCL kernel_bundle instance from a Level-Zero <code>ze_module_handle_t</code>. The <code>Context</code> argument must be a valid SYCL context encapsulating a Level-Zero context. The Level-Zero module must be fully linked (i.e. not require further linking through [<code>zeModuleDynamicLink</code>](https://spec.oneapi.com/level-zero/latest/core/api.html?highlight=zemoduledynamiclink#_CPPv419zeModuleDynamicLink8uint32_tP18ze_module_handle_tP28ze_module_build_log_handle_t)), and thus the SYCL kernel_bundle is created in the "executable" state.</td>

Reviewer: The formatting for the link on this line is incorrect because it mixes markdown with HTML.  As a result, the rendered spec look terrible here.

The following comments I made from #4542 apply here also:

* I think we need to be more precise about the requirements of the context parameter and say that the `ze_module_handle_t ` handle must have been created from this same context.

* If the default behavior is "transfer", then I think we need to add another requirement.  Since the runtime takes ownership of the native handle in this case, I think the application must also promise not to have any outstanding `ze_kernel_handle_t` handles to the underlying `ze_module_handle_t`. Otherwise, the runtime won't be able to deallocate that `ze_module_handle_t`.

If you want to address these in #4542 instead, though, that's fine with me.

Author: > If you want to address these in #4542 instead, though, that's fine with me.

Yes, that's what I will do.

and ```kernel_bundle``` classes.

### 4.3 Construct a SYCL object from a Level-Zero handle
        
The following free functions defined in the ```sycl``` namespace are specialized for Level-Zero backend to allow
an application to create a SYCL object that encapsulates a corresponding Level-Zero object:

<table>
<tr>
<th>Level-Zero interoperability function</th>
<th style="text-align:left"> Description</th>
</tr><tr>
<td>

``` C++
make_platform<backend::ext_oneapi_level_zero>(
    const backend_input_t<
        backend::ext_oneapi_level_zero, platform> &)
```
</td>
<td>Constructs a SYCL platform instance from a Level-Zero <code>ze_driver_handle_t</code>. The SYCL execution environment contains a fixed number of platforms that are enumerated via <code>sycl::platform::get_platforms()</code>. Calling this function does not create a new platform. Rather it merely creates a <code>sycl::platform</code> object that is a copy of one of the platforms from that enumeration.</td>
</tr><tr>
<td>

``` C++
make_device<backend::ext_oneapi_level_zero>(
    const backend_input_t<
        backend::ext_oneapi_level_zero, device> &)
```
</td>

> <td>Constructs a SYCL device instance from a Level-Zero <code>ze_device_handle_t</code>. The SYCL execution environment contains a fixed number of devices that are enumerated via <code>sycl::device::get_devices()</code> and <code>sycl::device::get_sub_devices(...)</code>. Calling this function does not create a new device. Rather it merely creates a <code>sycl::device</code> object that is a copy of one of the devices from those enumerations.</td>

Reviewer: I'm not sure the language you added about sub-devices here is correct.  Note that the API is named `device::create_sub_devices()` (not `get_sub_devices()`).  The distinction is important because it implies that the function creates a new object, it doesn't return some pre-existing object.

The core SYCL spec does **not** say that the number of sub-devices in the execution environment is fixed, and it does **not** say that calls to `create_sub_devices()` return a copy of some existing device object.  In fact, I would expect that on many implementations that two calls to `create_sub_devices()` would typically return distinct `device` objects.

I do see that the [Level Zero documentation](https://spec.oneapi.io/level-zero/latest/core/api.html#zedevicegetsubdevices) says:

> Multiple calls to this function will return identical device handles, in the same order.

However, this is not a guarantee that the upper layers of the DPC++ runtime guarantee that multiple calls to `device::create_sub_devices()` return the same `device` object.  Therefore, it seems safer to me **not** to make this guarantee in the Level Zero interop API.

Do you have some particular reason why we should make this guarantee for sub-devices?

Author: I think we should make this guarantee with Level-Zero backend, since we **can** do it. It is also intuitively expected for interop with Level-Zero, which makes such guarantees as you have noted.

Reviewer: After looking at the implementation, I understand this now.  Level Zero only supports partition by affinity domain, and in that case it does make sense that the set of sub-devices can be fixed.  If we want to make this guarantee, I'd like to tweak the wording to say:

> The SYCL execution environment for the Level Zero backend contains a fixed number of devices that are enumerated via <code>sycl::device::get_devices()</code> and a fixed number of sub-devices that are enumerated via <code>sycl::device::create_sub_devices(...)</code>.  [...]

I still wonder if we are painting ourselves into a corner here, though.  What if Level Zero supports `partition_by_counts` in the future?  There can not be a fixed set of sub-devices in that case, so we won't be able to support this guarantee.

Author: I've updated wording per your suggestion. Different partitioning is not planned in Level-Zero, and if it ever changes we would update our interop support.
